Add doc on disk-based vector search (#8332)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/knn/disk-based-vector-search.md

---
layout: default
title: Disk based vector search
nav_order: 16
parent: k-NN search
has_children: false
has_math: true
---

# Disk Based Vector Search

For low-memory environments, the [mode]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#vector-workload-modes) parameter should be set to `on_disk` for your vector field type. This parameter will setup your index to use secondary storage to extend memory. This allows users to trade some search latency for large memory savings while providing a strong recall value.

## Index Creation

To create an index, run the following:

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "innerproduct",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Internally, `on_disk` mode will by default configure the index to use the `faiss`'s `hnsw` algorithm with a [`compression_level`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#compression-levels) of `32x`. This will reduce the amount of memory the vectors occupy by a factor of 32! Then, in order to preserve the search recall, re-scoring will be enabled by default. This will setup the index to run a two-phased search, where the compressed in memory index is searched, and then the results are re-scored with the full-precision vectors loaded from disk.

Reviewer: I think this should be either `faiss's hnsw` or `the faiss hnsw`

> For some use cases, `32x` be too aggressive of a compression rate. If this is the case, it can be easily overriden by also setting the `compression_level` parameter:

Reviewer: `32x` might be

{ "my_vector_field": [1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5], "price": 12.2 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "2" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5], "price": 7.1 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "3" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5], "price": 12.9 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "4" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5], "price": 1.2 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "5" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5], "price": 3.7 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "6" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5], "price": 10.3 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "7" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5], "price": 5.5 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "8" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5], "price": 4.4 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "9" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5], "price": 8.9 }
```

## Search

> Search also works the same as other index configurations. The key difference is that by default, the `oversample_factor` of the rescore parameter will be set to X (unless compression_level is overridden - see this [table]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#rescoring-quantized-results-using-full-precision)). To run a query, run:

Author: good catch

    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, 6.5, 7.5, 8.5],
        "k": 5,
        "method_params": {
            "ef_search": 512
        },
        "rescore": {
            "oversample_factor": 10.0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

[Radial search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/radial-search-knn/) is not available with disk-based vector search.
{: .note}

## Model-based indices

For [model based indices]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#building-a-k-nn-index-from-a-model), the `on_disk` parameter can be specified in the training request similar to the index creation. By default, `on_disk` mode will resolve to use [faiss's IVF method]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#supported-faiss-methods) and a compression level of `32x`. To run the training API, run:
```json
POST /_plugins/_knn/models/_train/test-model
{
    "training_index": "train-index-name",
    "training_field": "train-field-name",
    "dimension": 8,
    "max_training_vector_count": 1200,
    "search_size": 100,
    "description": "My model",
    "space_type": "innerproduct",
    "mode": "on_disk"
}
```

> This command assumes that training data has been ingested into the `train-index-name` index. See [here]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#building-a-k-nn-index-from-a-model) for more details

Reviewer: Need period at the end of the details sentence.

For low-memory environments, OpenSearch provides _disk-based vector search_, which significantly reduces the operational costs for vector workloads. Disk-based vector search uses [binary quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#binary-quantization), compressing vectors and thereby reducing the memory requirements. This memory optimization provides large memory savings at the cost of slightly increased search latency, while still maintaining strong recall.

To use disk-based vector search, set the [`mode`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#vector-workload-modes) parameter to `on_disk` for your vector field type. This parameter will configure your index to use secondary storage. 

## Creating an index for disk-based vector search

To create an index for disk-based vector search, send the following request:

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "innerproduct",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> By default, the `on_disk` mode configures the index to use the `faiss` engine and `hnsw` method. The default [`compression_level`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#compression-levels) of `32x` reduces the amount of memory the vectors require by a factor of 32. To preserve the search recall, rescoring is enabled by default. The search on a disk-optimized index runs in two phases: the compressed index is searched first, and then the results are rescored using full-precision vectors loaded from disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the `on_disk` mode configures the index to use the `faiss` engine and `hnsw` method. The default [`compression_level`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#compression-levels) of `32x` reduces the amount of memory the vectors require by a factor of 32. To preserve the search recall, rescoring is enabled by default. A disk-optimized index search runs in two phases: The compressed index is searched first, and then the results are rescored using full-precision vectors loaded from disk.
```

To reduce the compression level, provide the `compression_level` parameter when creating the index mapping: 

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "innerproduct",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk",
        "compression_level": "16x"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

For more information about the `compression_level` parameter, see [Compression levels]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#compression-levels). Note that for `4x` compression, the `lucene` engine will be used.
{: .note}

> If you need more granular fine-tuning, you can override additional k-NN parameters in the method definition. For instance, to improve recall, increase the `ef_construction` parameter value:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need more granular fine-tuning, you can override additional k-NN parameters in the method definition. For example, to improve recall, increase the `ef_construction` parameter value:
```

```json
PUT my-vector-index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 8,
        "space_type": "innerproduct",
        "data_type": "float",
        "mode": "on_disk",
        "method": {
          "params": {
            "ef_construction": 512
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The `on_disk` mode only works with the `float` data type.
{: .note}

## Ingestion

> Once you create a disk-optimized vector index, you can ingest documents into it the same way as a regular vector index. To index several documents in bulk, send the following request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can perform document ingestion for a disk-optimized vector index in the same way as for a regular vector index. To index several documents in bulk, send the following request:
```

{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "2" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5], "price": 7.1 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "3" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5, 3.5], "price": 12.9 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "4" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5], "price": 1.2 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "5" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5, 5.5], "price": 3.7 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "6" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5, 6.5], "price": 10.3 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "7" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5, 7.5], "price": 5.5 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "8" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5, 8.5], "price": 4.4 }
{ "index": { "_index": "my-vector-index", "_id": "9" } }
{ "my_vector_field": [9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5, 9.5], "price": 8.9 }
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Search

> Search also works the same way as in other index configurations. The key difference is that by default, the `oversample_factor` of the rescore parameter is set to `3.0`, unless you override `compression_level`. For more information, see [Rescoring quantuzed results using full precision]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#rescoring-quantized-results-using-full-precision). To perform vector search on a disk-optimized index, provide the search vector:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Search is also performed in the same way as in other index configurations. The key difference is that, by default, the `oversample_factor` of the rescore parameter is set to `3.0` (unless you override the `compression_level`). For more information, see [Rescoring quantized results using full precision]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#rescoring-quantized-results-using-full-precision). To perform vector search on a disk-optimized index, provide the search vector:
```

```json
GET my-vector-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, 6.5, 7.5, 8.5],
        "k": 5
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Similar to other index configurations, you can override k-NN parameters in the search request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly to other index configurations, you can override k-NN parameters in the search request:
```

```json
GET my-vector-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "my_vector_field": {
        "vector": [1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, 6.5, 7.5, 8.5],
        "k": 5,
        "method_params": {
            "ef_search": 512
        },
        "rescore": {
            "oversample_factor": 10.0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

[Radial search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/radial-search-knn/) does not support disk-based vector search.
{: .note}

## Model-based indexes

> For [model based indexes]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#building-a-k-nn-index-from-a-model), you can specify the `on_disk` parameter in the training request similarly to providing them during index creation. By default, `on_disk` mode will resolve to use the [Faiss IVF method]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#supported-faiss-methods) and a compression level of `32x`. To run the training API, send the following request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For [model-based indexes]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#building-a-k-nn-index-from-a-model), you can specify the `on_disk` parameter in the training request in the same way that you would specify it during index creation. By default, `on_disk` mode will use the [Faiss IVF method]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#supported-faiss-methods) and a compression level of `32x`. To run the training API, send the following request:
```

> 

Reviewer 2: "Training API"?

Reviewer 3: This is just a description of what the API does, not the actual API name, so leaving lowercase.

```json
POST /_plugins/_knn/models/_train/test-model
{
    "training_index": "train-index-name",
    "training_field": "train-field-name",
    "dimension": 8,
    "max_training_vector_count": 1200,
    "search_size": 100,
    "description": "My model",
    "space_type": "innerproduct",
    "mode": "on_disk"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

This command assumes that training data has been ingested into the `train-index-name` index. For more information, see [Building a k-NN index from a model]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/#building-a-k-nn-index-from-a-model).
{: .note}

> You can override `compression_level` for disk-optimized indexes in the same way as for regular k-NN indexes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can override the `compression_level` for disk-optimized indexes in the same way as for regular k-NN indexes.
```
